---
title: "Good alien names"
date: 2020-06-12T09:28:49+01:00
description: "Need an alien name for your story or game? Here's some that were generated by our alien name generator"
---

Need a good alien name for your story or game? Here's some that were generated by our <a href="/alien-name-generator">Alien Name Generator</a>, which sticks alien-sounding syllables together. There's tens of thousands of combinations, so here's a few that we thought were interesting that could be used right now - or could inspire you to create a similar-sounding alien name. 

<h2>Alien names generated by our alien name generator</h2>

The description below each name has come from our <a href="/alien-species-generator">Alien Species Generator</a>, which creates a unique sentence describing the alien. It pieces together sentences randomly, sometimes with great success, and sometimes a little... odd. Well it's supposed to be odd! Hopefully it can inspire you when coming up with a brand new alien for your story. 

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Temernirs</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">A race of cave-dwelling arachnids. The surface of their homeworld is extremely hot and prone to severe electrical storms, so most large lifeforms live underground.. They only live for 20 days. A mother will give birth into another creature's nest, so that she doesn't have to take care of it. They only pose a mild threat.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">The Ancient Klatets</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">A race of insects with one sharp horn. They hibernate. The most rich members of society ritually go on a pilgrimage to a waterfall in the mountains whenever there is an eclipse They hibernate over their planet's long winter.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Boseax</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">A species of apes with a keen eye for a bargain. They live peacefully with nature. The majority live in transparent towers made from crystal.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Klators</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">Dim-witted bovids who have long tails with deadly spikes on the end. They have no anus, &amp; never defecate. They live in caves, deep under the planet's surface.</span></p>
</div>


<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Moetti</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">Ancient creatures who live in hammocks attached to a tall rock-face. They have to drink every 30 minutes, or they'll die. They are governed by a council of elders which makes important decisions based on a game of chance. They shed their skin once a month.</span></p>
</div>


<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Nirirans</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">This species evolved on a high gravity world and has a long, slender body with as many as 18 legs (depending on an individual's age). Although they appear to be anatomically similar to centipedes, they do not have exoskeletons but rather cartilaginous skeletons surrounded by soft tissue and leathery skin. They don't wear clothes on leap years. They long ago abandoned their homeworld following a natural disaster and now live inside several hollowed out asteroids.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Spabon</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">A race of mammals with three horns on their head. They eat their own faeces.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Suda'zed-lorians</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">A race of intelligent mobile plants with six tentacle-like arms. Only females are sapient and able to move, males being simple pollen-producing plants of significantly smaller size.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Blo'ala</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">Selfish aliens who have flame-resistant skin. They are natural thespians. They are a peaceful civilization, dedicated to creative &amp; leisure pursuits, such as art, music, dance &amp; topiary. They have advanced scientific knowledge &amp; an evolved sense of morality.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">The Immortal Gengi</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">Cow-like insects who punish political prisoners by removing their vocal chords. They love eating fish. The majority live in treehouses in the forest. They are reasonably good at operating heavy machinery, & this has become their major talent.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Odoreks</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">Carnivorous aliens who have light-emitting skin. They are extremely promiscuous and breed constantly. Their homeworld is dangerously overpopulated. They are reasonably good at operating heavy machinery, &amp; this has become their major talent.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Kay'ed</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">A species of clouds with no legs. They smell like potassium. They do not seem to experience any emotions. They are incredibly argumentative.</span></p>
</div>

<div class="alien-species">
    <p><em>Name:</em> <span class="alien-species-name">Klakro</span></p>
    <p><em>Description:</em> <span class="alien-species-description">Slow-moving aliens who have infrared vision. The oldest members of the society are sent to die in the wilderness. They are trying to evacuate their planet, as it's falling into a black hole.</span></p>
</div>

<h2>Need more alien names?</h2>

For more randomly generated alien names & descriptions, use our <a href="/alien-species-generator">Alien Species Generator</a>

Or here's a list of other websites that have random generators for alien names: 
<ul>
<li>
    <a href="https://www.fantasynamegenerators.com/alien-names.php">Fantasy Names - Alien Species Name Generator</a>
</li>
<li>
    <a href="https://www.seventhsanctum.com/generate.php?Genname=alienracename">Seventh Sanctum - Alien Race Name Generator</a>
</li>
<li>
    <a href="http://generatorland.com/usergenerator.aspx?id=10728">Generator Land - Alien Species Name Generator</a>
</li>
<li>
    <a href="https://thestoryshack.com/tools/alien-name-generator/">The Story Shack - Alien Name Generator</a>
</li>
</ul>